JUDY WOODRUFF: Good evening.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
HARI SREENIVASAN: And I'm Hari
Sreenivasan.
JUDY WOODRUFF: On the "NewsHour"
tonight:
President-elect Donald Trump
appoints senior
members of his economic team.
We look at who the men he wants
to run the
Treasury and Commerce
Departments are and
what changes they may make.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Also ahead
this Wednesday,
former Secretary of State
Madeleine Albright
and former National Security
Adviser Stephen
Hadley are here to discuss the
future of the
Middle East under a Trump
presidency.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And bringing
Silicon Valley
to Salinas Valley -- how a poor
farming community
in California is using
technology to revive
its economy.
PATRICK ZELAYA, Co-Founder,
HeavyConnect:
We believe that, when it comes
to ag-tech,
if you can make it in the
Salinas Valley,
you're going to be able to have
a product
that will be adopted globally.
HARI SREENIVASAN: All that and
more on tonight's
"PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: As the picture of
the Cabinet
president-elect Trump wants is
filled in,
we're seeing more figures who
reflect deep
ties to Washington or Wall
Street.
It's a contrast with his
campaign, during
which he disparaged the power
centers as corrupt
and out of touch with ordinary
Americans.
Lisa Desjardins has our report.
LISA DESJARDINS: Two fronts for
the transition
of power today.
In Washington, vice
president-elect Mike Pence
worked on alliances with
Republican leaders
on Capitol Hill, as, in New
York, team Trump
offered more Cabinet nominees
for Congress
to consider, including the
highest ranking
yet, financier Steven Mnuchin
for treasury
secretary.
STEVE MNUCHIN, Treasury
Secretary Nominee:
I couldn't be more excited about
the opportunity
to work with him in the
administration.
And our number one priority is
going to be
the economy, get back to 3 to 4
percent growth.
We believe that's very
sustainable.
And focus on things for the
American worker.
That's absolutely our priority.
LISA DESJARDINS: Mnuchin's
resume is full
of Wall Street experience,
including 17 years
at Goldman Sachs.
He has no government experience.
During the election, he headed
up fund-raising
operations for the Trump
campaign, and had
a hand in shaping candidate
Trump's message
on taxes.
If confirmed, he'd be tasked
with turning
that rhetoric into reality.
Alongside him this morning on
CNBC, billionaire
investor Wilbur Ross, who is Mr.
Trump's pick
to be the commerce secretary and
a point person
on trade policy.
WILBUR ROSS, Commerce Secretary
Nominee: The
real trick is going to be
increase American
exports.
Get rid of some of the tariff
and non-tariff
barriers to American exports.
LISA DESJARDINS: Ross is known
for turning
around troubled companies, where
he cuts costs
and sometimes worker benefits to
boost profits.
He also owned the Sago coal mine
in West Virginia,
where a collapse killed 12
miners in 2006.
He said, "It was the worst week
of my entire
life."
Mr. Trump also picked out a
deputy for Ross,
Chicago Cubs co-owner Todd
Ricketts, a prominent
Republican donor who, at one
point in the
campaign, spoke out against
candidate Trump.
Mr. Trump made other jobs news
today, too.
Overnight, there was word that
he had cut
a deal with the air conditioner
maker Carrier
to keep 1,000 jobs in Indiana.
That is most, but not all of the
jobs that
the company said it was going to
eliminate.
Also today, there were questions
about Mr.
Trump's own business future when
he's president.
On Twitter, he said he would
take himself
-- quote -- "completely out of
business operations,"
and indicated he will explain
how in a news
conference in two weeks.
Also still unknown, who will be
Mr. Trump's
secretary of state.
The president-elect met a second
time with
one candidate, Mitt Romney, last
night in
New York.
Afterwards, Mr. Trump's former
critic had
warm words.
MITT ROMNEY (R), Former
Presidential Candidate:
These discussions I have had
with him have
been enlightening, and
interesting, and engaging.
I have enjoyed them very, very
much.
LISA DESJARDINS: All this as
Green Party candidate
Jill Stein officially filed a
hand recount
request in Michigan, the third
of three states
she has pledged to verify.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm Lisa
Desjardins.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And we will have
more on president-elect
Trump's picks right after our
news summary.
HARI SREENIVASAN: In the day's
other news:
The North Carolina police
officer who fatally
shot a black man in September
will not face
criminal charges.
The shooting of Keith Lamont
Scott, whose
family at first insisted he
wasn't armed,
sparked days of protests across
Charlotte.
Today, the county prosecutor
said there was
evidence Scott was holding a
gun, and ignored
repeated requests to drop it.
ANDREW MURRAY, District
Attorney: The central
issue is whether Officer Vinson
was lawful
in using deadly force against
Mr. Scott.
Anyone is justified in using
deadly force
if he reasonably believed, and,
in fact, believed
that he or someone else was in
imminent danger
of great bodily injury or death.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Scott's family
insisted
today's decision will not end
their inquiry.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The death toll
from the wildfires
that swept through Tennessee's
Great Smoky
Mountains rose to seven today.
Dozens of people have been
injured and more
than 700 buildings were damaged
or destroyed.
Heavy rain brought some relief
today, but,
at points, more than 200
firefighters were
still fighting the flames.
GREG MILLER, Gatlinburg,
Tennessee, Fire Chief:
We have all seen how fires
rekindle.
And whatever rain we got, and
these structures
may dry out and they could start
back.
But we have crews that are
monitoring those
and going back in those areas.
They are driving through and
they're checking
and looking for hot spots.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Officials are
still investigating
what started the fires, but they
believe they
were likely caused by humans.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Powerful
storms soaked the
tinder-dry South overnight,
spawning tornadoes
that left five people dead.
The twisters tore through
Northeastern Alabama,
damaging buildings and killing
three people.
Across the border in Southern
Tennessee, two
others died, and dozens more
were injured.
Some roads in the South were
drenched with
up to two feet of water, after
two months
without rain.
JUDY WOODRUFF: There is word
today that the
pilot of the charter plane that
slammed into
Colombia's Andes Mountains told
air traffic
controllers that he ran out of
fuel moments
before the crash.
That is according to a leaked
recording of
the flight's final minutes.
All but six of the 77 people on
board died.
Most were members of a Brazilian
soccer team.
HARI SREENIVASAN: In Syria,
opposition activists
claimed nearly 50 civilians were
killed by
regime forces today as they fled
rebel-held
Eastern Aleppo.
Most of the victims were women
and children.
Activists estimate more than
50,000 people
have been displaced by the
fighting in the
past four days.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The director of
the CIA has
decried president-elect Donald
Trump's plan
to scrap the nuclear deal with
Iran.
In a BBC interview, John Brennan
said -- quote
-- "I think it would be
disastrous.
I think it would be the height
of folly if
the next administration were to
tear up that
agreement."
Brennan argued such a move would
open the
door for still other countries
to pursue nuclear
weapons.
HARI SREENIVASAN: The United
Nations Security
Council slapped new sanctions on
North Korea
today, in response to its fifth,
and largest,
nuclear test in September.
The council unanimously approved
the resolution,
which will slash North Korea's
biggest export,
coal, by at least 62 percent.
It also bans the regime from
exporting metals
like copper, nickel, and silver.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Democrats in the
U.S. House
of Representatives reelected
California's
Nancy Pelosi as their leader
today.
The congresswoman has led the
party in the
House since 2002.
Pelosi survived a challenge from
Ohio Representative
Tim Ryan in a 134-63 vote.
Her win came despite
disenchantment from some
in her caucus after a
disappointing showing
in this month's elections.
REP.
NANCY PELOSI (D-CA), House
Minority Leader:
We have a responsibility, and we
embrace the
opportunity that is presented.
We know how to win elections.
We have done it in the past.
We will do it again.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Maryland
Congressman Steny
Hoyer was also reelected as
House Democratic
whip.
HARI SREENIVASAN: The oil cartel
OPEC is decreasing
oil production for the first
time in eight
years.
Member nations agreed to a deal
that will
cut production by more than a
million barrels
a day, from its current daily
output of over
33 million barrels.
It's all part of an effort to
boost lagging
oil prices.
JUDY WOODRUFF: That news sent
energy stocks
soaring on Wall Street today,
but markets
ended the day mixed.
The Dow Jones industrial average
gained two
points to close at 19123.
The Nasdaq tumbled 56, and the
S&P 500 slipped
nearly six.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
the men who
will shape Trump's economic
agenda; on the
ground in a rapidly changing
Cuba; Madeleine
Albright and Stephen Hadley on
what to do
next in the Mideast; and much
more.
Well, as we have been reporting,
the president-elect
began fleshing out his economic
team today
by announcing his choices to run
the Departments
of Treasury and Commerce.
In doing so, the candidate, who
campaigned
with a heavy dose of populism,
elevated individuals
mainly known for their
connections to Wall
Street and high finance.
David Wessel of the Brookings
Institution
and a contributing columnist to
The Wall Street
Journal joins me now.
And welcome back to the program.
DAVID WESSEL, The Wall Street
Journal: Thank
you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, David, fill
out this picture
a little bit more of who --
let's start with
Steve Mnuchin.
He's the pick to head the
Treasury Department.
What more do we know about him?
DAVID WESSEL: Well, it's just
wonderfully
ironic that Donald Trump, who
railed against
the elite, lambasted Hillary
Clinton for giving
paid speeches to Goldman Sachs,
turned to
a guy who not only was at
Goldman Sachs for
17 years, but is the son of a
Goldman Sachs
lifer and has a brother who is
at Goldman
Sachs.
And so he's going -- he went to
Yale.
Wilbur Ross went to Yale.
It seems to a very anti-populist
kind of move
to pick these financiers for
these jobs.
(CROSSTALK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: Excuse me.
So, we're seeing some comments
from liberal
Democrats today who put out
statements saying
this is somebody who made a lot
of money at
Goldman Sachs when the banks
were bailed out
by the federal government, and
then he went
on and there was another -- he
left Goldman,
went on and bought a bank, was
involved in
buying a bank in California.
Tell us about that.
DAVID WESSEL: Right.
As you know, some of the
Democrats, Elizabeth
Warren and Bernie Sanders, think
anybody who
has ever worked for a bank
shouldn't be the
treasury secretary.
I think other people feel -- I'm
among them
-- that really having some
experience on Wall
Street might be a good thing for
treasury
secretary.
I think the reason Mr. Mnuchin
is controversial
is not only that he comes from
Goldman Sachs,
which is kind of the -- has been
the centerpiece
of a lot of criticism, but he
made a lot of
money buying IndyMac when it was
in trouble.
JUDY WOODRUFF: This is the bank
in California.
DAVID WESSEL: The bank in
California.
And then selling it, making a
bundle.
And in between, he got a lot of
grief because
the bank was accused by consumer
groups of
being very aggressive on
foreclosures.
So it looks like he is a guy who
profited
off of the financial crisis that
caused so
much harm elsewhere.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Is that clear
that he did profit
off the financial crisis?
DAVID WESSEL: No.
But he profited because he
bought a bank that
was in trouble cheap, fixed it
up and sold
it.
So, to that extent, he did make
money off
of the financial crisis.
But he didn't -- he comes from
the mortgage
business, but he was not at
Goldman during
the worst of the abuses.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So in terms of
the accusation
that he was aggressively pushing
foreclosures?
DAVID WESSEL: I don't know
enough about the
detail.
He's accused of that.
There were a lot of protests.
Clearly, the bank foreclosed on
a lot of people.
Lots of banks did that.
Whether he did more than other
people or his
bank did more than other people,
I really
don't know.
JUDY WOODRUFF: All right.
Well, let's talk about the
Commerce Department.
DAVID WESSEL: Right.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Wilbur Ross is
the pick to
be secretary of commerce.
DAVID WESSEL: Right.
So, I think Commerce is
interesting, but much
less important than Treasury in
general.
What makes Wilbur Ross so
important is that
he was close to President Trump
for the whole
campaign.
Steve Mnuchin joined relatively
late in the
campaign, only six months before
the election,
raised a lot of money, kind of
bought a lottery
ticket by betting on Donald
Trump, and won.
Wilbur Ross has been very
influential in talking
about Donald Trump and to Donald
Trump and
seems to have strong feelings,
as does Donald
Trump, about trade.
And the Commerce Department does
have some
responsibilities for trade and
tariffs, which
Donald Trump has threatened to
raise if our
trading partners don't play
ball.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, Wilbur Ross,
a billionaire,
made his money how?
DAVID WESSEL: Correct.
By buying companies that were in
bad shape,
fixing them up, laying off
workers, and selling
them and making money, some of
it overseas,
and some of it here.
He's made a lot of money doing
business in
China, which is kind of ironic,
since the
Trump people seem to look at
China as the
enemy now.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And, as you say,
talking about
trade.
Now, number two at Commerce,
Donald Trump
named Todd Ricketts, co-owner of
the Chicago
Cubs.
(CROSSTALK)
DAVID WESSEL: Right.
Yes.
So, I guess that means that
Donald Trump will
get good seats at Wrigley Field.
So, at least he comes from the
Middle West.
He doesn't come from New York.
He didn't go to Yale or Harvard.
He went to Loyola.
His family money comes from
Ameritrade and
the finance business.
He actually owns a high-end bike
shop.
And what is interesting about
them, as I think
you said earlier, is his family
was very much
against Donald Trump, and then
jumped on the
bandwagon and got in it.
So, these are all card-carrying
capitalists.
They're from the elite of the
American business
community.
They're not who you would have
expected a
populist, run-against-the-elites
president
to appoint.
On the other hand, they do have
some experience.
And having somebody who knows
something about
business and finance in these
jobs can be
a plus.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, finally,
David Wessel,
I want to ask you about this
deal that president-elect
Trump talked about today with
the Carrier
Corporation.
This is the air
conditioning-making company,
subsidiary of United
Technologies.
They were saying -- they
announced months
ago they were going to ship,
what, 2,100 jobs
out of United States to Mexico
from Indiana.
DAVID WESSEL: Twenty-one hundred
jobs from
Indiana.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Donald Trump
immediately during
the campaign said: I'm going to
do something
about this.
DAVID WESSEL: Right.
So, Donald Trump clearly leaned
on them.
Carrier, like any company that
has a consumer
brand -- and this one is owned
by United Technologies,
which has a lot of defense
contracts -- didn't
want to be crosswise with the
new president
of the United States.
It's the state of Indiana, Mike
Pence, still
the governor, the vice
president-elect, clearly
put some money on the table.
We don't know what the deal was.
They saved 1,000 jobs.
Ironically, in Indianapolis,
there's another
company that you have never
heard of called
Rexnord, which makes ball
bearings.
They're moving a plant to
Mexico.
They are laying off 300 people.
And Donald Trump doesn't seem to
be able to
save their jobs.
I think it's hugely symbolically
significant.
He manages to say to his
constituents: I did
something, I accomplished
something.
And I think it puts the business
community
on warning that this is not a
conventional
Republican.
He is going to try to muscle
companies that
haven't been muscled before.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Can he go
individually from
company to company that is
thinking of shipping
jobs out and say...
DAVID WESSEL: We create 180,000
jobs a month.
We have something like 12
million people in
manufacturing.
This is a drop in the bucket.
I think the question -- no, he
can't do that.
You're not going to -- every
company is going
to threaten to move to Mexico,
and he is going
to put money on the table to
keep them?
No.
But I think it puts business on
notice that
this president is willing to use
the bully
pulpit to embarrass them.
And, secondly, it suggests that
he and some
of his advisers may be more
willing to restrict
the freedom of companies to
close plants and
move than has been the case in
the previous
Democratic and Republican
administrations.
JUDY WOODRUFF: David Wessel with
the Brookings
Institution, columnist with The
Wall Street
Journal, we thank you.
DAVID WESSEL: You're welcome.
HARI SREENIVASAN: The ashes of
the late Cuban
dictator Fidel Castro began a
long procession
across the island nation today,
from Havana
to Santiago, where Castro
declared victory
in the revolution he led in
1959.
His funeral will be held there
Sunday, ending
nine days of mourning since his
death last
Friday.
"NewsHour" special correspondent
Nick Schifrin
is in Havana reporting for us
this week, joins
me now.
Nick, let's talk a little bit
about the route.
Why is it so significant?
NICK SCHIFRIN: Yes, Hari, it's
the same route
that he took in 1959, only in
reverse.
And it's really that trip that
cemented Fidel
Castro as a kind of heroic
figure in Cuba,
almost a destined savior of the
country.
That's certainly the image that
he tried to
portray, came in on a boat,
descended from
the mountains, won battles and
won over people
with his speeches, tried to
really portray
himself as a messiah for the
country.
And at least along the route
today, that image
of him really survives.
HARI SREENIVASAN: There aren't a
lot of freedoms
to speak out against the
government, but what
are people along the route
saying?
NICK SCHIFRIN: Yes.
Along the route, people use the
same exact
words, my leader, my father.
And even critics of Fidel Castro
say that
those sentiments are genuine
after so many
decades of his rule.
For example, Hari, I talked to
one family,
three generations.
The uncle used to be a Castro
bodyguard.
The grandmother told me that
Castro gave her
more opportunities.
An aunt told me that he really
believed in
human rights.
And the granddaughter,
23-year-old Gizelle
Gallego (ph), said that the
revolution should
go on, the ideals should go on,
and that there
shouldn't be drastic change in
Cuba, even
though the father of the
revolution has now
died.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Did you hear
any voices
of dissent?
NICK SCHIFRIN: Yes.
They are few and far between,
but they are
important to listen to.
And I spoke to one dissenter, as
he calls
himself, just a few hours ago.
His name is Carlos Miraros
Falcon (ph).
He says there is no freedom of
speech and
no freedom of multiple parties.
And what that means, Hari, is
that the criticism
of the government remains rare
and that the
opposition remains fractured.
And I asked him whether there is
any chance
of change now that Fidel Castro
is dead.
He said most likely not.
That's because Fidel's younger
brother Raul
has been running the country as
president
since 2008.
But he did point to one date,
2018.
That is the year that Raul
Castro promises
to step down.
One of two things could happen
there.
He will step down, but he will
remain head
of the party.
That means more status question.
Or it is possible, this
dissident said, that
Raul could step down and there
could be an
opposition leader who emerges.
HARI SREENIVASAN: When you talk
to people
on the route, they're very
quickly aware that
you're an American.
Does the conversation walk into
the territory
of the new president-elect?
NICK SCHIFRIN: Look, I think
that there have
been changes over the last few
years.
And more Americans have been
here, so they're
more used to us.
Certainly, there is some fear of
president-elect
Trump, most specifically because
there is
mostly unanimity over the deal
that Raul Castro
and President Obama struck in
the last couple
years, a kind of detente, and
they don't want
president-elect Trump to take
that away.
But critics do point out one
thing, that there
have been four times as many
detentions this
year already as in all of 2010.
That's according to the Cuban
Human Rights
and National Reconciliation
Commission.
And those people who point that
out point
to president-elect Trump's
tweets saying that
he would terminate the deal
unless Cuba is
willing to improve it.
There are some people who are
hoping he actually
does that, but, in general,
people want the
trend of the last few years to
continue.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Nick Schifrin
joining us
from Havana tonight, thank you.
NICK SCHIFRIN: Thanks, Hari.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour": a
leading Republican
senator on bringing a divisive
Congress together
to work with Donald Trump;
high-tech innovations
from the salad bowl of the
world; and coping
with parents who divorce later
in life.
Now we are joined by former
Secretary of State
Madeleine Albright, who served
in the Clinton
administration, and Stephen
Hadley.
He was a national security
adviser to President
George W. Bush.
Together, they have chaired an
ambitious project
called the Middle East Strategy
Task Force
that spent nearly two years
looking at that
troubled region's problems and
devising potential
solutions.
From its base at the Atlantic
Council, a Washington
think tank, the task force
released its final
report today.
And we welcome you both of you
back to the
"NewsHour."
Secretary Albright, to you
first.
Ambitious goal, doing something
about the
Middle East.
Remind us what you thought you
were going
to accomplish here.
MADELEINE ALBRIGHT, Former U.S.
Secretary
of State: Well, we were looking
at region
that we know is very important
to the United
States and obviously to the
world, and trying
to take a much deeper look at
the Middle East,
instead of kind of doing
Band-Aids or fire
drills, and looking at what can
be done to
make things less dangerous, to
deal with America's
national interests, which have
to do with
our friends and allies, nuclear
proliferation,
how to deal with terrorism.
And I'm very proud of what we
did, because
we spent a lot of time looking
at the local
situation, instead of telling
them what to
do and doing kind of what
Western powers have
done for a hundred years, is to
get a better
sounding of what's happening in
the region
itself.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Stephen Hadley,
you're calling
it a new strategic approach.
What's different about it from
what's happening
now?
STEPHEN HADLEY, Former U.S.
National Security
Adviser: Well, as Madeleine
said, we have
had a century where outside
parties have tried
to arrange things in the Middle
East, and
generally not very successfully.
What We have tried to do was
listen to voices
in the Middle East as to what
their vision
was for the future.
And we found was, they had a
vision that there
are people, entrepreneurs, both
social entrepreneurs,
business entrepreneurs, that are
making change
from the bottom up.
And there are governments like
the UAE and
Tunisia and Saudi Arabia and
Jordan that are
actually trying to move in a
direction and
take initiative for themselves.
So the new strategic approach
is, let's follow
the lead of governments and
people in the
region and have a supporting
role from the
outside, rather than the
reverse.
JUDY WOODRUFF: One of the first
things you
recommend, Secretary Albright,
is a new security
approach to the four countries
that have civil
wars under way right now, hot
wars going on.
You call, among other things,
for a stepped-up
military presence on the part of
the United
States.
Why do you think something like
this can happen,
given President Obama's
reluctance to do this
over the last eight years?
MADELEINE ALBRIGHT: Well, I
think it's been
evident that we can't just do
things diplomatically.
We do want to have a political
solution to
many of the issues, obviously
Syria.
But there has to be some way to
resolve the
civil wars.
And some of it may take
additional American,
not ground forces, but, in fact,
greater support
for the rebel groups through
special forces,
maybe some standoff approach to
it, working
with the allies, with the
coalition on some
issues from the air,
establishing a safe zone,
and that you can't just decide,
at least we
thought, working with our
advisers, that the
United States can just turn its
back on the
place, because the shorthand for
it is, there
is a crisis in the Middle East,
but it's also
from the Middle East, that's
affecting us
all.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Do you have
reason to believe,
Stephen Hadley, that the
president-elect,
Donald Trump, is going to be
interested in
an approach like this?
I mean, given what he said on
the campaign
trail, that's not at all clear,
is it?
STEPHEN HADLEY: Well, one of the
things he
said was that we need to do more
to defeat
ISIS and al-Qaida, Da'esh and
al-Qaida.
He was critical of the past
administration,
thought they had not done
enough.
We recommend expanding and
accelerating what
we're doing against Da'esh and
al-Qaida.
He was very critical of what
Iran has done
in the region.
We believe that, if we step up
what we're
doing against Da'esh and al
Qaeda in both
Iraq and Syria, that will put
some limitations
on what the Iranians can, quite
frankly, some
limitations on what the Russians
can do.
And with that new leverage, you
may be in
a situation to move over time to
the kinds
of political solutions that
we're looking
for both in Iraq and in Syria.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Do you have
reason to believe,
Secretary Albright, that Donald
Trump is going
to be interested in an approach
like this?
MADELEINE ALBRIGHT: Well, we
have to see,
frankly.
I think that my own view here is
that we have
to -- he is the president-elect.
And I think that, as he sees
what the issues
are, I am hopeful that he will
understand
the value of this approach,
which is that
we can't -- I mean, frankly, the
suggestions
that have been made during the
campaign don't
make much sense, because it's
either having
nothing to do with them or
bombing them to
-- he used an unspeakable word
-- but that
that's not consistent.
And, therefore, what we're
advocating is that
we can't turn our back on the
Middle East,
that that is not good for
American national
interest, and that one does have
to deal with
Da'esh, but also to try to deal
with the civil
problems that are there,
especially in Syria,
given what Assad is doing to his
own people.
So my feeling -- my hope, I have
to say, is
that he will pay attention to
this.
And this is a bipartisan effort.
I'm very proud to have been able
to work with
Steve Hadley on this.
I think we have taken a rational
approach
to a very, very difficult
problem.
JUDY WOODRUFF: You also call,
Steve Hadley,
for unleashing what you say is
the region's
human and economic potential,
hand in hand
with the security measures.
These are the kinds of things,
education,
engaging the youth of the
region, getting
-- giving opportunities to
women, these are
kinds of things that call for a
lot of money
and frankly some different both
religious
and cultural changes, don't
they?
STEPHEN HADLEY: I don't think
they call for
a lot of money.
And it's one of the things I
think that we
are proud of this report,
because when you
talk in Washington about the
Middle East,
it's all about Iraq and Syria
and Iran.
What we have found is that
there's positive
things going on, activity at the
local level,
government policies that are
moving in the
right direction of empowering
their people,
of getting rid of regulations
that are in
the way of the kind of
entrepreneurial activity
we're seeing.
There is some good news there.
There is something that we can
work with in
order to try to get a more
peaceful and stable
Middle East.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Is there
receptivity there
in each one of these countries
for what you're
calling for?
Because you're talking about
these countries
working together in many ways,
which they
haven't been willing to do.
MADELEINE ALBRIGHT: Well, we
notice there
is kind of different levels of
receptivity.
I do think that many of the
countries' leaders
know that they have problems and
that they
need to deal with their growing
youth population,
that the youth is actually an
asset, instead
of a problem, and that there is
money in the
region, and that they can help
each other.
And one of the other things that
I think we
also made a point about is that
new institutions
will make a difference,
parliaments.
Look, let me just say, we have
spent a lot
of time on this.
And a lot it may kind of seem
too idealistic.
I think the issue here is that
there does
need to be some humility in
dealing with this,
taking a long-term approach.
JUDY WOODRUFF: On the part of
the Americans?
Is that what you're saying?
MADELEINE ALBRIGHT: Yes,
absolutely, in terms
of knowing how difficult it is,
and deciding
to take kind of a step-by-step
approach.
It's a road map, really.
And it involves using what is
going on in
those countries, obviously, the
leadership,
the civil society, their young
people, women,
and really seeing their
resources as being
their own populations, instead
of kind of
complaining that the outside
world is telling
them what to do, knowing that,
if they take
steps forward, the outsiders
will help.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And just in 20
seconds, Steve
Hadley, what happens next?
How do you advance these ideas?
STEPHEN HADLEY: Well, we are
going to take
this on the road, if you will.
We want to talk to the new
administration.
We want to talk to the Congress.
We will talk to the
administration in power.
What we hope, though, is that
this will actually
provoke a conversation in the
region about
what the region needs to be
doing to lay a
foundation for a more hopeful
future.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, we thank
you very much
for coming to talk to us.
And we will be wanting to talk
to you as you
take these next steps and seeing
where it
goes, Steve Hadley, Secretary
Madeleine Albright.
MADELEINE ALBRIGHT: Thank you
for your interest,
Judy.
It's very important.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Thank you.
STEPHEN HADLEY: Nice to be with
you.
HARI SREENIVASAN: For more on
the latest Cabinet
nominations, their potential
conflicts of
interest and the Republican
Party's priorities
under a President Trump, I'm
joined by the
number three Senate Republican,
Senator John
Thune.
Thank you for joining us.
Quick order of business.
When the Senate goes into the
confirmation
process for the new commerce
secretary, Wilbur
Ross, will the Senate ask Mr.
Ross to put
all his assets into a blind
trust and perhaps
step off the board of the
world's largest
steel company?
SEN.
JOHN THUNE (R), South Dakota:
Yes, well, good
evening, Hari.
And, obviously, the Commerce
Committee, which
I chair, will be processing his
paperwork
and the confirmation of the next
commerce
secretary, as well as DOT and a
few others.
But we obviously be looking at
his background
and have those discussions as we
begin to
sort of drill down a little bit
and ask the
questions not only prior to, but
at the confirmation
hearing, about what his
intentions are with
respect to his business
dealings.
And as has been the case, at
least with most
Cabinet secretaries, they find a
way to insulate
themselves from their business
world and to
focus on the jobs at hand.
HARI SREENIVASAN: As you know,
the International
Trade Administration, which sits
under commerce,
sets the tariff policies to make
sure that
companies aren't dumping
products into -- onto
our soil.
If he still has stakes in
companies, the person,
couldn't he profit personally
from the policies
that he as commerce secretary
could set?
SEN.
JOHN THUNE: Well, those are
questions that
we will be looking at and he
will have to
answer before our committee.
Obviously, Penny Pritzker, the
current secretary
of commerce, when she went
through the confirmation
process, we asked a lot of these
questions.
And she ended up taking some
steps with respect
to her business that made sure
that there
wouldn't be those types of
conflicts of interest.
And I would expect the same
thing to happen
here.
HARI SREENIVASAN: All right, now
if Mr. -- Mr.
Ross has also indicated a fairly
nationalist
trade policy.
And this lines up quite welcome
with the president-elect.
Mr. Trump has said that he wants
to withdraw
from the Trans-Pacific
Partnership on day
one.
He's criticized NAFTA repeatedly
on the campaign
trail.
What would the impact of
withdrawing from
NAFTA or putting 35 percent
trade tariffs
against Chinese products, what
kind of impact
would that have on your state
and other states
like it?
SEN.
JOHN THUNE: Well, I'm certainly
not somebody
who is a fan of those types of
measures.
Obviously, I think we have to be
engaged in
the global marketplace.
Representing an agriculture
state that's very
dependent upon exports, I want
us to have
robust trading relationships,
where we can
interact with other countries
around the world
and get access to that
marketplace.
Now, how the new administration
decides to
do that remains to be seen.
They have talked about undoing
TPP and instead
engaging in a number of
bilateral-type trade
agreements.
However they decide to go about
it, I think
the important thing is that we
be engaged
in the global marketplace, not
only for economic
reasons, for trade, for the
vitality of our
economy in places like the
Midwest, but also
for national security reasons.
I think that we need to be
engaged in these
places in the world on an
economic basis,
because it does lead to so many
other issues
where we have issues and
concerns in some
of these regions.
HARI SREENIVASAN: And you are
part of the
congressional leadership now.
You all sort of run the board,
so to speak.
You have got the Senate.
You have got the House.
You have got the White House.
What are the legislative
priorities?
What are the things that we can
expect quick
action on?
SEN.
JOHN THUNE: Well, I think the
one thing that
we will probably be most focused
on early
on is the economy.
What can we do to get the growth
rate back
up to 3 or 4 percent?
This is the first administration
where we
haven't had a single year where
economic growth
has exceeded 3 percent.
It's the worst recovery in 60
years.
And in the exit polling in the
election this
year, 62 percent of Americans
said the country
is on the wrong track, and 52
percent of them
said the economy should be the
number one
issue.
So, we're going to be looking at
things that
we can do to unleash the
economy.
And that, I think, means dealing
with a regulatory
burden that's making it more
expensive and
more difficult to create jobs,
repealing and
replacing Obamacare, tax reform
that is pro-growth
and looks at what we can do to
unleash entrepreneurs
in our economy to get the growth
rate back
up and wages up.
Those are a series of things
that I think
you will see a very intense
focus on right
away.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Speaking of
reform, I know
you're an advocate for reform
when it comes
to federal retirement benefits,
Social Security,
Medicare.
Any action on that likely?
SEN.
JOHN THUNE: It's hard to say.
I think it wasn't something that
the president-elect,
at least early on in his agenda,
articulated
as something that he wanted to
accomplish.
But I think we all recognize
that, if you
look at the actuarial balances
of some of
these programs, Social Security,
Medicare,
for example, we have to make
them sustainable
for future generations.
And that means we have got to
take steps to
strengthen them today.
And I think the sooner we get
started on that,
the better.
I'm not saying when that is
going to happen.
I think, as I mentioned before,
early on,
this new incoming president has
an agenda
he wants to accomplish.
We look forward to working with
him.
But I hope that we engage on
this issue of
entitlement reform at some point
in a way
that preserves those programs,
not just for
people who depend upon them
today, but for
future generations of Americans
as well.
HARI SREENIVASAN: All right,
Senator John
Thune, thanks so much.
SEN.
JOHN THUNE: Thanks, Hari.
JUDY WOODRUFF: California's
Salinas Valley
is often called the salad bowl
of the world.
Roughly 70 percent of the
nation's lettuce
crop is grown there, along with
plenty of
other produce.
Special correspondent Cat Wise
traveled to
the region to take a look at
some high-tech
innovations being used to
improve production.
Her story is part of our weekly
series covering
the Leading Edge of science and
technology.
CAT WISE: As the sun rose over
the fertile
land of Salinas Valley,
California, one recent
morning, a group of farmworkers
waited to
sign in for their shift, not on
paper, as
they normally do, but on an
iPad, where an
app has their name and job
assignments already
programmed in.
They are using HeavyConnect, a
new mobile
communication app designed to
help farm managers
keep better track of equipment
and personnel.
And the team that developed it
were out bright
and early to check in one of
their newest
customers, farm manager Sam
Brigantino, who
works for a large grower called
Tanimura and
Antle.
Co-founder Jessica Gonzalez
walked him through
a new update.
JESSICA GONZALEZ, Co-Founder,
Tanimura and
Antle: You see the times they
worked, and
if they had any breaks and
meals, it would
be in between there.
The jobs they did here, the
legal statement.
SAM BRIGANTINO, Tanimura and
Antle: Yes, I
like the pulldowns much better
on this one.
JESSICA GONZALEZ: Basically, the
functionality
and flow is all the same.
It's just an update to the U.I.
CAT WISE: An app's U.I., or user
interface,
is not a typical topic of
conversation on
most farms.
But scenes like this are
becoming more common
throughout Salinas.
That's because there's a effort
under way
by many in the community to make
this valley
a bit more like a certain
high-tech valley
to the north.
A very visible sign of that
effort is this
new Silicon Valley-esque office
space.
It's an incubator for ag-focused
startups
that opened last December in
downtown Salinas.
And it's where HeavyConnect and
a number of
other small companies are now
coding away,
hoping to break into the $50
billion-a-year
fresh produce industry.
And that's just in California.
PATRICK ZELAYA, Co-Founder,
HeavyConnect:
We believe that, when it comes
to ag-tech,
if you can make it in the
Salinas Valley,
you're going to be able to have
a product
that will be adopted globally.
CAT WISE: HeavyConnect
co-founder Patrick
Zelaya is a former John Deere
sales manager
who has spent a lot of time with
farmers.
He says he started the company
because he
saw a big need for a product
that would help
farmers get back something they
have very
little of: time.
PATRICK ZELAYA: In large-scale
farming, the
job is a 14-hour-a-day six days
a week.
What's not commonly known is
that farmers
spend more time on the
administration, managing
the operation, than they do
farming.
So, HeavyConnect provides
farmers the ability
to know what's going on in their
farm operationally
without having to be there.
CAT WISE: Other companies here
are working
on a host of new products for
soil testing,
food safety, crop monitoring.
And on the day we visited, water
was the focus.
WOMAN: Good afternoon, and
welcome to Western
Growers Center for Innovation
and Technology
tech talk, with our guest, SWIIM
System.
KEVIN FRANCE, SWIIM System:
Thank you, Lisa.
CAT WISE: Kevin France is
heading up a company
that aims to help farmers
monitor and manage
their water usage.
Water management is a hot area
for innovation,
given California's ongoing
drought.
KEVIN FRANCE: So what is SWIIM?
We are your on-farm water
accountant.
We are like the QuickBooks for
ag water.
CAT WISE: Dave Puglia is an
executive with
the Western Growers Association,
a large trade
group which is funding and
running the new
center.
He says farmers want these
innovations to
succeed as much as the
developers do.
DAVE PUGLIA, Western Growers
Association:
Farmers have been innovative
from the dawn
of time, but our own members
recognized that
the collision of forces that are
impacting
their ability to stay in
business, the regulatory
pressures, resource pressures --
we have less
water available.
We have less of a work force
available to
us.
So, this center is designed to
bring the best
of Silicon Valley, the best
minds in technology
and innovation, closer to the
best farmers
in the world, and speed the
innovation that
can solve those problems.
CAT WISE: The scenic Salinas
Valley is less
than an hour's drive from
Silicon Valley,
the innovation hub of the
country.
But, in many ways, the two areas
could not
be more different.
Unlike the high-income, mostly
white and Asian
population of Silicon Valley,
Salinas Valley
is about 75 percent Hispanic.
Many here work in the fields or
packaging
plants, jobs that are often
hourly and low-paying.
There are pockets of extreme
poverty, high
crime, and poorly performing
schools.
And for the area's many young
people, there
are few economic opportunities.
RAY CORPUZ, Salinas City
Manager: There aren't
the jobs yet for them.
But we want to create that
opportunity.
CAT WISE: Ray Corpuz is the city
manager of
Salinas.
He and other community leaders
are very supportive
of the new focus on technology,
but he wants
more of it to be home grown.
RAY CORPUZ: We're looking for
our citizens,
our community, the people that
live here to
actually run the new machines,
provide the
new applications, to make
technological innovations.
So, we have to have a skilled
work force.
CAT WISE: That future tech-savvy
work force
is now being developed in this
classroom.
These college students are
enrolled in a new,
unique program.
They will be earning a computer
science degree
in just three years.
Half of that time is spent at
the Salinas
community college, called
Hartnell College,
and they finish up at a nearby
state university,
CSU Monterey Bay.
The highly competitive program
is called CSin3,
and the students attend classes
year-round.
Many in the program are the
first in their
families to attend college, and
thanks to
a local, well-known grower who
has established
a large scholarship, their
tuition is paid
for.
ZAHI ATALLAH, Dean of Academic
Affairs, Hartnell
College: Only 6 percent of the
computer industry
is women.
Only 3 percent are Hispanic.
Our classrooms?
Majority Hispanic.
At least 50 percent of our
students are women.
CAT WISE: Zahi Atallah is a dean
of academic
affairs at Hartnell.
He says that while there is a
big push to
get more students into
higher-paying tech
jobs, the school is also trying
to encourage
local youth to pursue other
good-paying careers,
like welding and farm equipment
maintenance.
But regardless of what they end
up doing,
Atallah says the students'
understanding of
this community, and the overall
ag business,
will be a big benefit.
ZAHI ATALLAH: Many of those
students are farmworkers
themselves and kids of
farmworkers.
Imagine what they're bringing to
the table,
having the background of
farming, having lived
it themselves, because they can
create and
innovate faster and most
effectively.
CAT WISE: One of those using her
past experiences
in her new career is
HeavyConnect's Rivka
Garcia.
She was born and raised in
Salinas, and worked
in a produce processing plant,
before graduating
earlier year from the CSin3
program.
Garcia is now using all her
skills, including
coding, to help make the
company's app more
intuitive for those who will be
using it.
RIVKA GARCIA, HeavyConnect: I
worked with
a lot of people that didn't
understand how
to use technology.
And creating an app that is easy
to use, that
won't confuse them and will get
the job done,
and will be really similar to
what they do
on paper, but is more efficient,
is, I think,
a big thing that I bring to the
table.
CAT WISE: The HeavyConnect team
is now working
on a new app feature that will
allow farmers
to monitor their equipment using
Bluetooth
sensors, and Garcia is leading
that project.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm Cat
Wise in Salinas,
California.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And Cat's report
is also part
of our Breakthroughs coverage of
invention
and innovation.
HARI SREENIVASAN: We will be
back in a moment
with a look at the challenges of
facing divorced
parents as an adult.
But, first, take a moment to
hear from your
local PBS station.
It's a chance to offer your
support, which
helps keep programs like ours on
the air.
(BREAK)
HARI SREENIVASAN: Finally: Many
families struggle
with divorce.
Tonight, writer Carmen Machado
shares her
perspective as one whose parents
separated
when she was an adult.
We are relaunching our essay
series as IMHO,
In My Humble Opinion.
CARMEN MARIA MACHADO, Author:
Two years ago,
when I moved home to the East
Coast, my parents
announced to me and my brother
and sister
that they were getting divorced
after 31 years
of marriage.
I was both surprised and not
surprised.
My parents had many fraught,
fragile years
under their belts, but they'd
seemed to weather
them.
It'd been bad, but I had assumed
they had
survived the worst of it, that
their lives
would mellow now that their kids
were grown.
I have many friends with
divorced parents,
but all of them had experienced
the process
as children and adolescents.
After my own parents told me the
news, I learned
that, instead of being an
anomaly, they're
the new norm.
So-called late-life divorce is
increasingly
common.
One recent study showed that,
since 1990,
the divorce rate for people over
50 has doubled.
In a way, it was simpler.
Yes, there were assets to
divide, but my siblings
and I were grown, so there was
no discussion
of custody, no decision about
living one place
or another, no shuttling back
and forth between
houses.
And I was happy for them, in a
way.
They could now independently
live the lives
they couldn't live together.
My parents announced their
divorce right before
my fiancee and I got engaged.
She asked if I wanted to put off
the engagement
just until the dust settled.
My initial reaction was
forceful.
I told her, no, I just wanted to
move on.
My parents' problems were not
mine.
But then I found myself
overwhelmed with anxiety.
It wasn't that I suddenly had
large, cosmic
doubts about love.
Rather, I worried that my
parents' divorce
was some kind of harbinger, a
bad example
Rather, I worried that my
parents' divorce
was some kind of harbinger, a
bad example
that I, genetically yoked to
them as I was,
would be forced to follow.
It took a few months to figure
out that the
answer was somewhere in between.
It took a few months to figure
out that the
answer was somewhere in between.
I realized I had been given a
gift, that my
adult self had a perspective
that my teenage
I realized I had been given a
gift, that my
adult self had a perspective
that my teenage
self would have never been able
to conjure,
that you have
self would have never been able
to conjure,
that you have
to have models of successes and
failures to
try and make something work.
I saw that my fiancee and I
needed to create
something with the mistakes of
my parents'
I saw that my fiancee and I
needed to create
something with the mistakes of
my parents'
in mind, not pretend that their
problems didn't
exist.
And then we needed to forge our
way forward,
together, with all of the data
in hand.
Next year, I will get married.
The year after that, I will be
older than
my parents' marriage ever was.
I don't know yet whether or not
mine will
outlive theirs.
But I hope that it will,
because, as best
as we possibly can, my fiancee
and I are building
it that way.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Carmen Maria
Machado.
And a news update before we go.
The House of Representatives
voted to pass
a 6.3 bipartisan health care
bill.
The House of Representatives
voted to pass
a 6.3 bipartisan health care
bill.
The bill includes funding for
the Food and
Drug Administration and National
Institutes
of Health, as well as $1.8
dollars for Vice
President Biden's Cancer Moon
Shot Initiative.
The Senate is expected to debate
the bill
next week.
Online tonight: From the Brexit
to the U.S.
election, globalization seems to
be
Online tonight: From the Brexit
to the U.S.
election, globalization seems to
be
in reverse gear around the
world.
What forces are at work, and
what comes next?
Plus, Donald Trump's advisers on
space policy
argue that we should abandon
NASA's Earth
science satellites and focus
instead on deep
space.
All that and more at
PBS.org/NewsHour.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Tonight on
"Charlie Rose:
actress Amy Adams on her newest
films, "Arrival"
and "Nocturnal Animals."
And that's the "NewsHour" for
tonight.
On Thursday, we will take a look
at lifesaving
efforts by two American
volunteers on the
front lines of the battle for
Mosul.
I'm Hari Sreenivasan.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And I'm Judy
Woodruff.
Join us online and again right
here tomorrow
evening.
For all of us at the "PBS
NewsHour," thank
you, and good night.
For all of us at the "PBS
NewsHour," thank
you, and good night.